Clarify behavior of the default output validator (#368)
Kattis/problem-package-format: spec/2023-07-draft.md

### Default Output Validator Specification

The default output validator is essentially a beefed-up diff that can be used in the common case where the output validator needs only compare the output of a submitted program against a trusted judge reference solution.

> It parses the submission output and answer files as UTF-8 (without byte-order mark) and tokenizes the files by splitting on sequences of one or more consecutive Unicode whitespace code points. 

Reviewer: Is "Unicode whitespace code points" well defined? There are "space separator characters", and there is the "Whitespace property", which I believe is had by all "space separator characters" and some "control characters".

The only (seemingly correct) list I can find is this:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitespace_character#Unicode

Also, do we know that the reference implementation does this?

Author: The whitespace property is probably what we want, though there are some unusual corner cases (i.e. the zero-width space U+200B and Braille pattern blank U+2800 will not count as whitespace).

Author: > Also, do we know that the reference implementation does this?

No, but I suspect that the reference solution's support of Unicode in general is suspect. Is it OK to require adding support?

Reviewer: > No, but I suspect that the reference solution's support of Unicode in general is questionable.

Why do you think that? Proper casing with Unicode is complicated (and as we have discussed locale-dependent), but plain diffing should work fine?

> Is it OK to require adding support?

I think so, yes. We should require that it's (in some reasonable sense) backwards compatible, and we should understand exactly what we are adding. I.e. it should be well defined **and** we should know what the current implementation does.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why we feel the need to support anything outside of ASCII here. Feels like it's just making things more complicated for no reason?

Author: It is already current practice to include non-ASCII characters in ICPC problems. See the linked issue where there are reports of using Swedish and Icelandic accented characters in problem output. I also remember seeing a problem that asked contestants to print emojis.

Requiring anyone who wants to use more than the 26 letters of the English alphabet to write a custom validator seems *really* silly to me in 2025.

Author: Or are you talking specifically about whitespaces? If we allow Unicode in problem output, it seems sensible to treat all Unicode whitespaces (such as a non-breaking space, perhaps copy-pasted from the contest web site) as whitespace?

Reviewer 3: I don't think the default validator **needs** to support more. It would certainly be very nice if it did though, but I do not think it is a priority as is.

Reviewer 2: I'm talking specifically about whitespace. I find it hard to believe that contestants would expect non-ASCII whitespace to be interchangable with ASCII whitespace.

> such as a non-breaking space, perhaps copy-pasted from the contest web site

AFAIK browsers convert non-breaking spaces to normal ones upon copy.

Reviewer 3: > Or are you talking specifically about whitespaces? If we allow Unicode in problem output, it seems sensible to treat all Unicode whitespaces (such as a non-breaking space, perhaps copy-pasted from the contest web site) as whitespace?

Agreed, but this is a change to the behavior of `isspace` as far as I'm aware. It might break an old problem to change it, but it is unlikely.

Author: Ok. So we need consensus on:

1. The character set supported by the default output validator. Options include:
- the 128 standard ASCII code points only;
- ASCII, plus some unspecified additional set of characters left up to the contest system (the status quo);
- UTF-8 Unicode;
- something else.

2. The characters recognized as whitespace. Options include:
- a specific set of ASCII whitespace characters only;
- an unspecified set of characters left up to the contest system (the status quo);
- Unicode whitespace characters;
- something else.

Author: > I find it hard to believe that contestants would expect non-ASCII whitespace to be interchangable with ASCII whitespace.

Honestly, I don't think contestants think too much about character encodings at all.

I'm not going to die on this hill; but my point is that non-ASCII spaces *do* show up in places visible to contestants (including on web sites and in PDFs of the problem statement) and I do think they would expect a copy-pasted "space" to be treated as a space.

Reviewer: These are all the Unicode "whitespace" characters: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitespace_character#Unicode

We currently support exactly the once in the "Basic Latin" block, i.e. Tab, Line feed, Vertical tab, Form feed, Carriage return, and space. (Support as in "they are considered whitespace, and thus used for separating tokens", you can **use** all the others perfectly fine, but they will not. be "ignored" as whitespace).

Looking at the other whitespace characters, I don't really feel that we need to "support" them. I would prefer to properly specify the exact current behavior and let that be the spec.

And this doesn't mean that we don't support UTF-8 or Unicode. We have problems that use much more than ASCII for input and output, and that works perfectly fine.

Author: It "works fine" because the implementation uses functions whose behavior is unspecified outside the POSIX locale, where the unspecified behavior happens to have done the "right thing" for your specific contest. That's not a good specification :(

I happy to say that the default output validator must support ASCII, and may support any contest-system-specified superset of ASCII, since that seems to be the way the wind is blowing.

> In its default mode, the default output validator then ignores the whitespace and compares the submission output and answer files token by token. If there is a disagreement in the number of tokens in the two files, the validator rejects the submission. The validator may also reject any submission output that is unreasonably large (including due to containing unreasonable amounts of whitespace).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In its default mode, the default output validator then ignores the whitespace and compares the submission output and answer files token by token. 
If there is a disagreement in the number of tokens in the two files, the validator rejects the submission. 
The validator may also reject any submission output that is unreasonably large (including due to containing unreasonable amounts of whitespace).
```

> In its default mode, the default output validator then ignores the whitespace and compares the submission output and answer files token by token. If there is a disagreement in the number of tokens in the two files, the validator rejects the submission. The validator may also reject any submission output that is unreasonably large (including due to containing unreasonable amounts of whitespace).

Reviewer: This makes it sounds like we only care about the **number** of tokens, which is obviously not the case.

Author: I've reworded to make it clearer that this is the exceptional case.

The default output validator supports the following command-line arguments to control the above process:

Arguments                    | Description
---------------------------- | -----------
`case_sensitive`             | indicates that comparisons should be case-sensitive (see below for details).
`space_change_sensitive`     | indicates that differences in type or amount of of whitespace should be rejected (see below for details).
`float_relative_tolerance ε` | indicates that floating-point tokens should be accepted if they are within relative error ≤ ε (see below for details).
`float_absolute_tolerance ε` | indicates that floating-point tokens should be accepted if they are within absolute error ≤ ε (see below for details).
`float_tolerance ε`          | short-hand for applying ε as both relative and absolute tolerance.

#### Comparing Floating-Point Tokens

> If a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will attempt to parse each answer file token as floating-point (see [general requirements](#general-requirements) for details). For each success, the token is compared to the submission output token using the following floating-point semantics. (If no floating-point tolerance has been set, floating-point tokens are [compared as strings](#comparing-string-tokens).)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will attempt to parse each answer file token as floating-point (see [general requirements](#general-requirements) for details). 
For each success, the token is compared to the submission output token using the following floating-point semantics. 
(If no floating-point tolerance has been set, floating-point tokens are [compared as strings](#comparing-string-tokens).)
```

> If the submission output token cannot be parsed as floating-point, the validator rejects the submission as incorrect. Otherwise, if `s` is the submission output floating-point value and `a` is the answer file value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the submission output token cannot be parsed as floating-point, the validator rejects the submission as incorrect. 
Otherwise, if `s` is the submission output floating-point value and `a` is the answer file value:
```

- if an absolute tolerance `ε` has been set, the token is accepted if `|s-a| ≤ ε`;

> - if a relative tolerance `ε` has been set, the token is accepted if `s` and `a` are both exactly zero, or if `|s-a|/|a| ≤ ε`;

Reviewer 4: This leads to division by zero if `a=0` and `s!=0`, although that implicitly means that the condition is not true.

I was comparing with our (old?) copy of the reference implementation and there I don't see the check that `s` and `a` are both exactly zero.

Author: Yes, good point. So when `s==a==0`, should that count as failing the relative error tolerance?

Reviewer 5: Both 0 should pass. It would if you write it using a multiplication instead: |s-a|<=eps*a, so maybe we should just do that?

- when supplying both a relative and an absolute tolerance, the token is accepted if it is within either of the two tolerances.

It is an error to provide any of the `float_relative_tolerance`, `float_absolute_tolerance`, or `float_tolerance` arguments more than once, or to provide a `float_tolerance` alongside `float_relative_tolerance` and/or `float_absolute_tolerance`.

> Note that if a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will parse exact integers as floating-point and apply the above semantics to them. For problems containing a mix of integer and floating-point output, a custom output validator must be used if exact comparison of the integer tokens is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that if a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will parse exact integers as floating-point and apply the above semantics to them. 
For problems containing a mix of integer and floating-point output, a custom output validator must be used if exact comparison of the integer tokens is required.
```

> Note that if a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will parse exact integers as floating-point and apply the above semantics to them. For problems containing a mix of integer and floating-point output, a custom output validator must be used if exact comparison of the integer tokens are required.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that if a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will parse exact integers as floating-point and apply the above semantics to them. For problems containing a mix of integer and floating-point output, a custom output validator must be used if exact comparison of the integer tokens is required.
```

#### Comparing String Tokens

If `case_sensitive` is specified, the two tokens must match exactly, i.e. consist of exactly the same code point sequence. 

> Otherwise, the submitted output token is accepted if it matches the answer file token up to case. The default output validator must treat uppercase ASCII letters `A`--`Z` as equivalent to their lowercase counterparts. A contest system may additionally implement more lenient, locale-specific case-insensitive string comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, the submitted output token is accepted if it matches the answer file token up to case. 
The default output validator must treat uppercase ASCII letters `A`--`Z` as equivalent to their lowercase counterparts. 
A contest system may additionally implement more lenient, locale-specific case-insensitive string comparison.
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure about "A contest system may additionally implement more lenient, locale-specific case-insensitive string comparison"?

I think I would rather say that systems may defined additional options for the default validator?

Author: In a perfect world, I agree. However, in the linked issue there was a desire for the default (case-insensitive) behavior to support e.g. Icelandic and Swedish accented characters.

Reviewer: Yes, but I don't think that should be done by saying that not `case_sensitive` can optionally mean something very different on some systems. We should either expand the meaning of not `case_sensitive` so that we get nice casing for alphabets outside of ASCII, or add some other setting for locale specific casing. I think the former is impossible, because (I think) the set off all locale rules are contradictory, and I'm not sure the latter is wort it, but maybe?

Author: I'm not opposed to a `locale_dependent` option. Are people willing to make the default ASCII-case-insensitive-only?

#### Whitespace Sensitivity

> By default, whitespace in the submission output is only used for tokenization and is otherwise ignored. As a consequence, the default output validator is lenient with regard to leading and trailing whitespace, and it treats any sequence of one or more whitespace characters in between tokens as equivalent to any other such sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, whitespace in the submission output is only used for tokenization and is otherwise ignored. 
As a consequence, the default output validator is lenient with regard to leading and trailing whitespace,
and it treats any sequence of one or more whitespace characters in between tokens as equivalent to any other such sequence.
```

> By default, whitespace in the submission output is ignored by the default output validator after tokenization. As a consequence, the validator is lenient with regard to leading and trailing whitespace, and it treats any sequence of one or more whitespace characters in between tokens as equivalent to any other such sequence.

Reviewer 4: I don't understand the first sentence: after tokenization there's no way anymore to (not) ignore whitespace, I'd say? A suggestion:
```suggestion
By default, the validator treats any sequence of one or more whitespace characters in between tokens as equivalent to any other such sequence. Since this includes newlines, the default validator is also lenient with regard to leading and trailing whitespace.
```

Author: I don't think that quite covers it, since there could be zero whitespaces before the first token vs. one or more whitespaces, and that would still be accepted.

Reviewer: I agree with @evouga . What @eldering says, is how we have usually explained it (and it is the logic that name `space_change_sensitive` is based on), but what we *actually* do is what @evouga is explaining, i.e. we tokenize on whitespace, which is the same as "amount of whitespace does not matter" **but also** "leading and trailing whitespace does not matter".

### Default Output Validator Specification

The default output validator is essentially a beefed-up diff that can be used in the common case where the output validator needs only compare the output of a submitted program against a trusted judge reference solution.
The default output validator supports the following command-line arguments:

Arguments                    | Description
---------------------------- | -----------
`case_sensitive`             | indicates that comparisons should be case-sensitive (see below for details).

> `space_change_sensitive`     | indicates that differences in type or amount of of whitespace should be rejected (see below for details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`space_change_sensitive`     | indicates that differences in type or amount of whitespace should be rejected (see below for details).
```

`float_relative_tolerance ε` | indicates that floating-point tokens should be accepted if they are within relative error ≤ ε (see below for details).
`float_absolute_tolerance ε` | indicates that floating-point tokens should be accepted if they are within absolute error ≤ ε (see below for details).
`float_tolerance ε`          | short-hand for applying ε as both relative and absolute tolerance.

#### Output Parsing

The default output validator parses the submission output and answer files as a string of single-byte characters and tokenizes the files by splitting on sequences of one or more consecutive whitespaces.
Whitespace characters are: space (`0x20`), form feed (`0x0c`), line feed (`0x0a`), carriage return (`0x0d`), horizontal tab (`0x09`), and vertical tab (`0x0b`).
In its default mode, the default output validator then ignores the whitespace and compares the submission output and answer files token by token. 

> (If there is a disagreement in the number of tokens in the two files, the validator rejects the submission instead.)

Reviewer 4: Nitpick: 
```suggestion
If there is a mismatch in the number of tokens in the two files, the validator rejects the submission.
```
I the parentheses should not be there because this is a relevant specification. Also small wording changes.

Author: Let's remove the parentheses but keep the "instead"? Otherwise niemela had a concern earlier that the sentence might be read to imply the inverse.

The validator may also reject any submission output that is unreasonably large (including due to containing unreasonable amounts of whitespace).

#### Comparing Floating-Point Tokens

> If a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will attempt to parse each answer file token as floating-point (see [general requirements](#general-requirements) for details). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will attempt to parse each answer file token as a floating-point number (see [general requirements](#general-requirements) for details). 
```
I'd say that this is more correct than using just "floating point"; it would require some more changes below.

If the submission output token cannot be parsed as floating-point, the validator rejects the submission as incorrect. 
Otherwise, if `s` is the submission output floating-point value and `a` is the answer file value:
- if an absolute tolerance `ε` has been set, the token is accepted if `|s-a| ≤ ε`;
- if a relative tolerance `ε` has been set, the token is accepted if `|s-a| ≤ ε|a|`;
- when supplying both a relative and an absolute tolerance, the token is accepted if it is within either of the two tolerances.

It is an error to provide any of the `float_relative_tolerance`, `float_absolute_tolerance`, or `float_tolerance` arguments more than once, or to provide a `float_tolerance` alongside `float_relative_tolerance` and/or `float_absolute_tolerance`.

Note that if a floating-point tolerance has been set, the default output validator will parse exact integers as floating-point and apply the above semantics to them. 
For problems containing a mix of integer and floating-point output, a custom output validator must be used if exact comparison of the integer tokens is required.

#### Comparing String Tokens

> If `case_sensitive` is specified, the two tokens must match exactly, i.e. consist of exactly the same character sequence.

Reviewer 4: The text doesn't say anything about character sets. Wouldn't it be better to say "byte sequence" here? I'm not an expert on UTF-8, but doesn't it have different byte sequences repesenting the same character (sequence)?

Reviewer 2: No, UTF-8 has a unique encoding of every character. There is however the question of how to deal with bytes sequences that are not valid UTF-8, which would be resolved by switching to comparing raw bytes instead.

Author: Yes, let's say byte sequence.

UTF-8 has overlongs, which either need to be treated as invalid or aliased to their shortest code points. But let's not deal with this---if students submit UTF-8 output that is properly encoded, comparing byte sequences should work fine.
